sit up with some powerful to the medical
stuff I'm going to stop you mid-sentence
because we can go straight over to
Downing Street to where the Home
Secretary is taking the podium good
afternoon welcome to Downing Street for
the government's daily press conference
on coronavirus I'm joined today by
Martyn Hewitt chair of the national
police chief Council and by Professor
Steven powers I'd like to update you all
on the government's plan to fight this
pandemic our priority is to slow the
spread of coronavirus so that fewer
people are sick at any one time and our
brilliant NHS continues to remain able
to cope and to do this we are following
the experts scientific and medical
advice and taken the right steps at the
right moment in time and that is why we
are instructing people to stay at home
to protect the NHS and save lives I can
report through the government's ongoing
monitoring and testing programme that as
of 9:00 a.m. today there have been three
hundred thousand and thirty four 974
thousand tests carried out across the UK
excluding Northern Ireland off these
seventy eight thousand nine hundred and
ninety one people have tested positive
twenty thousand one hundred and one
patients are currently Hospital in Great
Britain who have already tested positive
sadly nine thousand eight hundred and
seventy five people have now died an
increase of 917 on yesterday as this
virus continues to devastate families
across our nation my thoughts prayers
and heartfelt condolences are with their
friends their families and their loved
ones to everybody suffering from this
horrific virus whether you are at home
or receiving care from our brilliant NHS
in hospital you are in all our thoughts
at this devastating time and I'm very
pleased to say that the Prime Minister
continues to make good progress
but these stark figures highlight the
gravity of this national emergency the
devastating impact of this virus and the
unprecedented but necessary actions that
we are taken to tackle it is affecting
every aspect of our daily lives this
virus is also changing the nature of the
threat that we face from crime Martin
and myself today will update you on the
emerging crime picture and the extra
work that the government along with law
enforcement partners is undertaken to
better protect victims and Martin will
set out that total crime has dropped as
people follow the necessary advice to
stay at home but while the guidelines
are helping to keep the majority of us
safe they also amplified danger for
others leaving people feeling vulnerable
isolated and exposed because criminal
criminality also continues to adapt
fraudsters are exploiting coronavirus as
a hook for new acquisitive crimes with
losses to victims already exceeding 1.8
million pounds and the perpetrators of
sickening online child abuse seeking to
exploit the fact that more and more
young people and children are at home
under online and in the last week the
national domestic abuse helpline
reported a 120 percent increase in the
number of calls it received in one
24-hour period now while we have not yet
seen a sustained rise in reports of
domestic abuse to the police this
increase in those seeking help for this
hidden crime is extremely concerning and
being no doubt they'll be absolutely no
let-up in our operational response for
the victims of these crimes home is not
the safe haven that it should be and
that is why I have been working with law
enforcement charities schools businesses
and local councils to address this
change in threat picture our incredible
police officers and firefighters are out
in their communities right now
yes helping to fight crime but also to
protect the
and to protect victims and I want to
emphasize that anybody who is a victim
of these crimes can still get help
anyone in immediate danger should call
999 and press five five on a mobile if
they are unable to talk let me repeat
that again
anyone in immediate danger should call
999 and press five five on a mobile if
you are unable to talk our outstanding
police will absolutely be there for you
the National Crime Agency is also
bearing down on offenders and raising
awareness to protect victims of fraud
cybercrime and child abuse but we all
must do more to protect our neighbors
our friends our family members by
sharing information about the support
that is available the Chancellor this
week announced a 750 million pound
package it was a boost for charities
including those charities providing
services for victims of domestic abuse
and their families and today I can
announce that we will go even further to
provide support for those in danger of
domestic abuse and I'm launching a new
national communications campaign to
reach out to those who are at risk from
abuse highlighting that they can still
leave home to get the support that you
need
it will signpost victims in terms of how
they can access help but also to
reassure them by making sure that they
can access the services that they need
at this particular time and importantly
it will tell them that they are not
alone
coronavirus has opened britain's
enormous heart and shown our love and
compassion for one another as we come
together to help those who are most in
need and I'm now asking this nation to
use that amazing compassion and
community spirit to embrace those who
are trapped in the horrific cycle of
abuse to help us all look out for those
who need help we have created a new
campaign and we have created a symbol of
hope a hamper
and embossed with a heart so that people
can easily show that we will not
tolerate abuse as a society I ask you
and I urge everyone to share this on
social media or in the windows of your
own homes just to demonstrate how much
we care and how much our country cares
and also we can show and take the time
out to show the victims of domestic
abuse that they are not on their own I'm
also providing up to two million pounds
to enhance online support services and
the help lines for domestic abuse so
that anybody who needs that help and
support can access that support these
services will be boosted from new IT
provided by the business the company
Fujitsu to assist smaller domestic abuse
charities and they're trained support
workers to provide the crucial services
remotely we all know that there are
concerns about capacity right now in the
system and in particular for Refugees to
provide enough spaces accommodation
during these challenging times now I'm
clear about this
it's the perpetrators who should be the
ones that have to leave the family homes
and not the supposed loved ones whom
they torment and abuse our priority is
to get the abusers out but sadly this is
not always possible so we're a victim
and their children do need to leave we
will ensure that they have a safe place
to go to and that's why we are looking
at alternative accommodation to support
those in need at this difficult time
fighting coronavirus requires an
extraordinary national effort and I
would like to reiterate my personal
thanks to everybody across all aspects
of society and our country for playing
their part I'm immensely grateful to
everyone who is heeding the instruction
to stay at home this remains crucial
over the bank holiday weekend especially
as the weather continues to improve but
we have given the police powers to
enforce and necessary measures we have
put in place including through the
enforcement of fines and I'd like to
thank them our police officers and the
staff who work in Tyler
to keep us safe for engaging with the
public so constructively to encourage
everyone to do the right thing and avoid
the need to use those powers the
overwhelming majority of the people are
listening and making their own
sacrifices to support our amazing police
officers and staff as they protect and
safeguard the most vulnerable but my
message to anyone still refusing to do
the right thing is clear if you don't
pay your part
our selfless pleas who are out there
risking their own lives to save others
will be unafraid to act their work is
helping our doctors our nurses our
health professionals to fight this virus
and to save lives if you don't follow
the guidance you will be endangering the
lives of your own friends family and
loved ones to protect those that you
care about and the capacity of our
police and our hospitals to protect us
all there is just one simple thing we
ask you all to do that is to stay at
home protect the NHS and save lives
I'll now hand over to Martin for an
operational update Thank You Home
Secretary in many ways this feels a very
different Easter weekend for all of us
not travelling to see family and friends
or out enjoying the glorious weather it
feels different for the police officers
and the staff who were working this
weekend too they have new
responsibilities
they are tackling new risks the streets
are empty businesses are closed as we
all adapt to a new way of life but much
does remain the same officers are still
out in their communities
fighting crime protecting victims and
tackling anti-social behavior some
example in recent days a man arrested in
the Isle of Wight in connection with a
10 million pound importation of cocaine
seven people arrested in London
including two at Heathrow Airport who
are attempting to flee the country as
part of an ongoing investigation into
serious violent crime 400 domestic abuse
suspects arrested in two weeks in the
West Midlands and as criminals seek to
take advantage of the virus a man has
been jailed for
personal protective equipment from
hospital here in the capital and the
less visible policing continues to the
work to trace child abusers to track
terrorists and to protect us from
cyberattacks goes on as before and we're
taking preventive action as well the
National Crime Agency are now taking
down fraudulent websites and email
addresses and have launched an online
safety at home campaign giving parents
information to keep their children safe
while they're likely to be spending more
time on their devices initial figures
from all forces show a 21 percent fall
in overall crime across the last four
weeks compared to the same period last
year that drop combined with the
commitment of our over 200,000 officers
and staff across the UK and the
fantastic response from our volunteer
special constables who work more than
two hundred and twenty-two thousand
hours in March means that we are in a
strong position keep reporting crime to
us our teams are working around the
clock to keep you safe and respond to
emergencies I particularly want to
reinforce the Home Secretary's message
to victims of domestic abuse or
controlling behavior we will come when
you call for help and to abusers do not
think that this is a time where you can
get away with this we will still arrest
we will still bring people into custody
and we will still prosecute fighting the
virus and protecting the NHS and saving
lives is and national efforts and police
have stepped up in their work alongside
communities to support those hardest hit
by the virus and to reduce the strain on
the NHS and other care services for
example two officers in London responded
to a call where a 90 year old woman had
collapsed in her home they gave first
aid and recommended that she should go
to hospital but she was concerned
because she didn't think she'd get to
the shop in time to get milk so the
officers were able to get that milk for
her and even helped her fix the bricks a
broken light bulb when she got back to
other officers in Manchester responded
to a concern for welfare call and
encountered an elderly man who had no
electricity
eating or food the neighborhood policing
team working with the local housing
department and businesses were able to
put money on his meter and get his
fridge fully stocked for the next day
and he now has a community contact in
case he needs any further supports and
officers in Cambridgeshire have been
linking with a citizenship group to
deliver tablet devices to vulnerable
schoolchildren to ensure that they too
can continue to learn at home while the
schools are closed and of course we have
new responsibilities given to us as part
of the government response to the virus
which we will use carefully in the UK
police gave their legitimacy legitimacy
and authority from the consent and
support of our communities and the
public we are implementing the new
regulations in that tradition of British
policing since the new powers were
introduced officers have engaged with
thousands of people and in most cases
these people have quickly understood why
it's important to follow the rules and
no enforcement has been necessary
officers on the ground are telling me
that they're seeing a great amount of
support from the public and indeed
getting thanks for the role that they
are playing however we have had a small
minority of people who despite our best
efforts have refused to follow the
instruction and officers have needed to
use their enforcement powers next week
we will publish full data on enforcement
so far which will include this Easter
weekend but I can tell you now that
using early data from 37 forces that
1084 fines have been issued in England
and Wales up to Thursday the 8th of
April so across all of those forces
that's an average of less than 80 for a
day this shows that the overwhelming
majority of people are abiding by the
rules and are staying at home to protect
the NHS and to save lives and I think it
also shows that our approach engage
explain and encourage and only as the
last resort to enforce is working in
those few cases where officers or police
forces have made mistakes in inter
the new regulations they have quickly
sought to correct them and provide the
necessary clarity we will continue to be
guided by principles of fairness
proportionality and common sense and I
recognize that it's important that the
public are able to judge us on whether
we are keeping to those principles so we
will publish enforcement data every
fortnight as we move through this crisis
this remains a very challenging
situation for everybody public and the
police as we all adapt to the changes
that the country has seen thank you to
all those officers and staff that are
working this weekend and throughout
these testing times on top of the work
that you do every day to keep your
community safe you're now also helping
doctors nurses and other help health
care workers to fight this virus and
save lives
police chiefs will continue to work with
governments with staff associations and
others to give you the guidance the
protective equipment and testing so that
you can do your job as safely as
possible thank you again to the public
for your continued support and my plea
to you is simple even in times of
frustration and this Goodweather work
with us stay home protect the NHS and
save lives
Thank You Martin I'll now hand over to
Professor powers well as we've heard the
instructions that we have all been given
to stay at home to avoid social contact
to maintain social distancing are all
designed to ensure that we stop the
spread of this virus we reduce the
number of cases and we save lives and
reduce pressure on the NHS and although
I know that there is a lot of anger at
the foolish few who think they can flout
the rules
I would like like to pay tribute to the
vast majorities you've heard from Martin
the vast majority of the British public
who are clearly complying with the
instructions that have been given and we
see that in many ways as the first chart
shows we continue to see that the use of
public transport
has been very very great greatly reduced
and that is being maintained over the
weeks of the lockdown in the next chart
you will see that that is then
translating from a stabilization in the
number of infections through to what you
see through to the number of new cases
so as we see here there is been a
leveling off of the number of new cases
it does vary from day to day but by and
large this is the sort of effect that we
would expect to see from everybody
following those instructions and then in
the next slide you can see that that in
turn is translating into a stabilization
first signs of a plateauing of people
who unfortunately need to be
hospitalized or in hospital beds you can
see as we said before that there are
more cases in London because sprayed in
London has come first but early signs of
stabilisation in the rest of the country
- and then in the next chart
unfortunately as I and others have said
before we are still seeing sadly high
numbers of deaths that will be the very
final thing that will change and start
to decrease but we are confident that if
everybody applies that follows the
instructions complies and follows the
instructions that we've all been given
then that will begin to translate in the
next weeks into a reduction in in the
daily deaths
now the NHS strategy through all of this
has been to ensure that we always have
the capacity to deal with the surge in
numbers of patients with coronavirus and
that has been the case and my colleagues
in the NHS are working night and day
around the clock to ensure that that
Headroom that that capacity whether it's
for people who are intensive care units
you need ventilators through to people
on general wards of that head room is
there that also means at the same time
the NHS is open for business for people
who have other illnesses
this weekend for example it's a bank
holiday weekend general practices are
open pharmacies are open so if you are
unwell with a condition that is not
coronavirus if you have symptoms of a
heart attack that you're worried about
or symptoms of a stroke if you have a
sick child who's deteriorating if you're
a pregnant women and you're worried
about the movements of your your baby
then you should be accessing services in
exactly the same way that you always
have done through 1 1 1 GP services or
in emergencies through 999 the NHS is
open for business managing and capable
of managing people with a wide range of
illness so as I said at the start the
entire strategy is to ensure that by
following instructions something that we
must all follow we will see a reduction
in debt and we will protect the NHS it
is a bank holiday weekend it's a time of
year when typically we would be
celebrating or getting together with
relatives and close friends but I'm
afraid this year it has to be for all of
us a stay at home Easter thank you
professor powers now I think we're good
to take our questions from journalists
and the first question to David Shipman
from the BBC good afternoon
David we can't hear you you sure you're
not on mute thank you could you start
again please thank you good afternoon
and apologies to everybody a couple of
questions if I may about personal
protective equipment one is a detailed
one for Steven parent if I may we get
some very big numbers for items of PPE
being supplied but it's very hard to
compare them with items actually needed
on the frontline in hospitals I mean I
thinking in particular of FFP three face
masks and gowns which I gather a
single-use can you tell us how many are
needed week by week and how many are
actually being delivered and then a
question to the Home Secretary and day
after day questions come up about
shortages of PPP I wonder whether on
behalf of the government you'd be able
to give a commitment to a date when
what's needed on the front line is
actually delivered thank you so on on PP
on PPE as we have said many times in the
Secretary of State for Health and Social
Care said yesterday it's absolutely
critical that we get PPE out to all
those working at the front line so that
they not only are protected but they
feel safe and and there are three
elements to that the first is on the
guidance for PPE and just over a week
ago that guidance was updated it was
updated by public health England but in
collaboration and with input from a wide
number of professional groups including
the Royal College of Nursing the academy
of medical role ecology so I'm very
confident that we have a set of guidance
that every professional all
professionals can sign up to and are
confident that it's based on the best
scientific evidence that we have the
second strand is to ensure that the
supply chain is working and and this has
been a huge increase in the distribution
the number of organizations that need to
be supplied with PP so we've been
working NHS England with the government
to make sure supporting the government
to make sure that we get that supply
through it's very difficult to give you
a precise number because it varies from
day to day and it varies from
organization to organization but I can
assure you that we are increasingly
collecting that information as the
supply chain is changed with the
assistance of the military so that we do
have that detailed information at
organizational level and at the same
time we are ensuring that we have a good
line-of-sight to the equipment that is
available and that which will be coming
into the third strand which is procuring
equipment clearly there is a a global
demand for personal protective equipment
at the moment and I know that government
with our support is working night and
day to ensure that we procure the PPE
that we need so for instance in FFP
three masks that you mentioned I do have
confidence that we have supplies of FFP
three masks that are required and on
gowns we're working very hard as you
speak we extended the use of gowns in
the guidance last week so we knew there
would be some short-term challenges to
the supply chain but we are working very
hard including with the Health Safety
Executive to ensure that we can use the
widest range of gowns possible to ensure
that that supply is there and as I said
we are procuring from everywhere and
including from the manufacturing base in
the UK you heard Burberry and others and
our manufacturing gowns in the UK to
ensure that that supply is secure
Stephen thank you and David in answer to
your question
Stephens obviously covered off the main
strategy and the plan that has been also
outlined by the Secretary of State for
health yesterday here where he spoke
very clearly about the measures and the
steps that are taking place around PPE I
think it's worth noting certainly for
viewers at home is that absolutely the
government's who's working across every
single agency that they would expect us
to work with health and safety exact
popeck health England various groups and
organizations within the supply chain we
are also working to do exactly that in
terms of procuring PPE for other aspects
of public services too so please fire
certainly something that Martin and I
have been working on over the
for weeks and ensuring that we have not
just a distribution but the supply chain
and we already know that certainly from
a police and fire perspective and this
links over to prisons and other key
public services we've absolutely secured
our supply chain every single aspect of
public service requires different
guidance around PPE and also different
types of guidance and that's exactly
what we've all been working through was
anything else you wanted to come back on
well just is would it be possible to
give a commitment to a date by when the
right quantities will reach the right
people because every day we hear from
certainly NHS frontline staff well I
think David look I mean I can't speak
for every single strand right now of
public services and PPE but the plan has
been outlined certainly by the Secretary
of State for Health and Social Care but
from a policing perspective you know
we're already out there in terms of
making sure that we have enough gloves
face masks and a substantial supply
chain as well with already 1.5 million
gloves and masks in the pipeline for
distribution so this is about various
aspects of various services whether it's
police in fire prisons the NHS of course
the NHS is the priority right now which
is why we're asking people to stay at
home but at the same time as Stephen has
outlined and also the Secretary of State
for Health and Social Care there is a
clear plan we're working with not just
surprised with manufacturers to really
bolster and boost the supply that we
need for PPA PPE which quite frankly is
unprecedented during this crisis can I
move on to the next question please
which is either deal more from channel 4
it's a question for the Home Secretary
I'm simply will you apologize to NHS
staff and their families who've told us
it's the lack of necessary PPE that's
led to preventable mass infections and
many deaths well I think is I mean look
absolutely we are focused as a
government across all depart
to make sure that everyone in the NHS
has everything they need in terms of
recall resources and equipment and PP is
at the heart of that obviously it is
absolutely the heart of protecting
everybody who is working night and day
right now to save lives to save lives
and prevent further deaths now as you've
already heard from Stephen you've heard
from the Secretary of State for Health
and Social Care as well over a number of
occasions and just standing here
yesterday that there is a clear plan
when it comes to PP in the NHS there are
there being distribution issues those
issues have now been addressed through
working with the military the mo D who
are absolutely triage in and getting the
surprise out to the frontline but at the
same time there is an enormous effort
Houk you loo an effort right now in
terms of bolstering up our manufacturing
capability and capacity we've already
heard Stephen refer to some big
companies such as rolls-royce and also
Burberry who are up in their own
production and stepping into this area
so our priorities absolutely to make
sure that they are equipped they are
resourced and the frontline of the NHS
and what I would say to you is that this
government's when all colleagues are
committed to doing that and we are
working day and night we're bringing in
new resources new support staff the mo D
other government departments working
with new businesses and other partners
to make sure that not only can we get
the supply out to people but there were
also boosting our own supplies and
demands and the United collaring
supplying the UK but no apology Home
Secretary for these failings which nhf
staff and their families blame on the
government well I'm sorry if people feel
that there have been failings I'll be
very very clear about that but at the
same time we are in an unprecedented
global health pandemic right now it is
inevitable that the demand and the
pressures on PPE and the demand for PPE
are going to be exponential they're
going to be incredibly high and of
course we are trying to address that as
a government and I think that is right
that is our priority mat Hancock as
Secretary of State for Health has spoken
about this repeatedly through the plan
that he has outlined and obviously the
ways in which we want to do much more to
manufacture our own PPE in this country
while we also
boost our own supplies from overseas
partners and countries where more PP is
coming into the country but also
ensuring that the distribution which is
unprecedented right now in terms of
health care settings whether it's
hospitals GP surgeries care homes
everyone needs that people on the front
line and everyone is working to achieve
just that whether it's through the
Department of Health through the Cabinet
Office through public health England
through Health and Safety through the
guidance and the resources that we're
trying to get out there you are
apologizing for the lack of PPE which
has led to massive infections and deaths
of several nurses and doctors I have
been very clear and what I have just
said and you know I'm sorry that people
feel that way but I do want to say at
the same time that we are doing
everything within our power and our
means to ensure that we can boost our
capacity when it comes to PP and to make
sure that we can get capacity PPE out to
the frontline in the NHS thank you can I
go on to our next question now - ed
Malnik from The Sunday Telegraph Thank
You Home Secretary given the rising
levels of unemployment under research
today suggesting that 3 million people
going hungry as a result of that
pandemic to what extent are you
concerned about the wider negative
impact of the prolonged lockdown and it
mr. Hewett there have been suggestions
of a possible ban on outdoor exercise if
the current rules aren't followed
properly would that be enforceable so at
first of all in response to your
question of course across the whole of
government you know we are absolutely
conscious of the level of vulnerability
in society and you've already heard me
speak this afternoon about you know
categories of individuals who need
support from government but you have
spoken about the economic impacts and
the economic long-term social and
economic consequences and impacts of
this virus and the impact this virus is
having on society the fact that we
putting forward and we have very very
restrictive measures stopping people
from going into work but also a huge
impact in terms of what we're seeing
staff being furloughed across various
businesses and things of that nature I
think first and foremost it's important
for everybody to recognize that there is
government support and there is
financial help and support for
individuals and people that need that
help
there's the measures obviously through
DWP but also for businesses as well
through the Department of Business and
through the Treasury now when it comes
to the long term situation none of us
can stand here today be wrong for us to
do this to stand here and speculate in
terms of when restrictions might move
when they would be lifted because this
government unlikely so it's following
the scientific advice through Sage which
meets twice a week to look at the type
of measures and the approaches that
we're taking as a government but I think
that the most important point for me to
make right now is if people need help
and support from government financial
assistance support for their families
when it comes to catering for basic
bills and food then absolutely whether
it's through MHC or G through not just
the shielding work but local government
work getting food out to communities and
distribution but also through the
financial support the government has put
in place that help is there and I would
urge anybody that needs that help and
support to get in contact Martin at the
and the measures that were put in place
were put in place clearly to save lives
and to stop transmission of the disease
it's very clear within those measures
that exercise is permissible and the
reality is as I've said the vast vast
majority of people are adhering to those
measures and doing what they can do to
to protect people we are not calling for
any extension of the regulations what I
do call for people to do is to act
reasonably everybody is entitled to take
exercise but it's making sure that you
are taking the exercise that's necessary
and in the way that is with what we're
trying to achieve through these
regulations which is not in a situation
where you are risk transmitting the
disease to anybody else
so everybody acts responsibly the vast
majority of the public are acting
responsibly and as I've said if
they do encounter police officers when
they're out exercising we will engage
with them we will explain the the
regulations and if it's appropriate for
them to go home we will encourage them
to go home but it's all about talking
and working and using common sense and
everybody being responsible I figured
it's just worth some amplifying Martin's
point that the reason why we put the
regulations and the measures in place in
the first incidence was clearly to stop
the spread of the disease and policing
in particular they've embraced that when
I look at the work and today I was
speaking on the call to all police
chiefs with Martin we have regular daily
operational calls we can absolutely see
the majority of police officers around
the country are following the guidance
really well it is quite clear that you
know we've seen one or two incidences
and we shouldn't allow you know a few
social media posts to blow out of
proportion the way in which the guidance
and the guidance are being put in place
and enforce at the end of the day in our
country we have policing by consent and
that means our officers are engaging the
public they're explaining to the public
why they shouldn't be having mass
gatherings and congregating while also
encouraging them to act responsibly and
do the right thing and I think that is
absolutely at the heart of the policing
measures that we've been putting in
place and of course the relationship
that we have in our own communities with
our own police officers was there
anything else you would like to come
back on thank you which is a concept
here on the point about the negative
impacts of a lockdown sorry I just broke
up there marginally I think I brought
your question I think you just
highlighted and said were those measures
worse than we had expected is that
correct with a negative impact well I
think quite frankly the measures that
were brought in a few weeks ago now
inevitably we're going to have an
economic consequence and we are
obviously going to work through that and
I think that's been highlighted very
clearly actually by the work of the
Chancellor and the business secretary in
terms of the
recked impact to the economy and the
type of measures they have been able to
institute to protect people and their
livelihoods which i think is really
important I do think though we have to
recognize at the same time there's a
whole spectrum of socio and economic
impacts that will materialize over a
period of time we're in the process and
I don't know professor powers would like
to comment on this at all but certainly
working through sage who will be
collating this information of the data
and of course they will be able to help
inform us on policy decisions that we as
a government and as politicians will be
able to undertake going forward but of
course our overriding concern will be
the health and well-being of the public
in the population where there is
deprivation and where there are serious
issues of vulnerability those people are
our priority we have to find ways in
which we can still access them contact
them and look after them whether that's
at a local level or through some of the
national schemes that we are putting in
place but of course all of this going
forward will rightfully be based upon
the evidence that comes from sage and
the scientific advice that we'll be
getting so I think it's important to be
honest and I think we have been the
there is no easy path there is no easy
course through a global pandemic there
are dangers whichever course you take
and and some of those relate to economic
consequences I think the chief medical
officer has been very clear that from a
health perspective there are at least
four things that we worry about in terms
of the health of individuals within
within the UK so the first is the direct
consequences of deaths and harm through
through Kovac 90 the second is that the
Health Service gets overwhelmed by the
number of patients by the surgery on it
and I'm pleased to say as I said earlier
that that has not happened but clearly
that is something that we worry about
the third is is a reduction in access to
health services because we've had to use
a lot of our capacity for Co vide 19 and
I talked earlier about the need for
people who have other health conditions
particularly emergency health conditions
to access the health service and the
fall
is the long-term health effects of the
economic consequences of lockdowns
and and some of those are in opposite
directions so so it's very hard to to
ensure that all of those are mitigated
completely so as I said at the start
it's there's no easy path through a
pandemic but the government has said all
along that it will it will course that
it plot that course based on the best
possible scientific evidence it sages
job to provide that evidence to the
government and of course as we learn
more about the virus
that evidence becomes clearer all the
time Thank You Steven
thank you Ed's can I now go to Nigel
Nelson from the Sunday Mirror good
afternoon
yes this is a question for Steven powers
in a sense as a continuation of your
last one is the reason you won't discuss
an exit strategy because there can't be
one until there's a vaccine which is
possibly 80 months away will some
restrictions have to stay players stay
in place till then and if so what would
those restrictions look like and a
question for the Home Secretary this is
you this is your first time at one of
these will you been for the last three
weeks and now you're back did you speak
to the Prime Minister today thank you
thank you I'll start with Steven and
then I'll come back to United States so
on a vaccine a vaccine is clearly an
important part of any long-term
management of this virus so vaccine
development is underway this is a global
health emergency it's probably the
greatest global health emergency we've
had in a century and I think what you're
seeing is the greatest scientific
response to that that we have probably
known so so the virus was identified
very early on in the epidemic in China
it was sequenced its genetic code was
was made available very quickly and
that's allowed academics and companies
around the world to very quickly start
to develop vaccines and you you will be
aware of the various
groups that have been starting to make
progress and very early trials in
patients and I'm really pleased to say
that that some of that groundbreaking
work is being undertaken in the UK
University of Oxford you will have heard
about and of course one of the great
strengths of the UK is its life sciences
academic basin in industry so we will be
the forefront of that vaccine
development that vaccines take months to
develop we need to make sure that they
are safe and effective and then of
course they need to be manufactured and
deployed so vaccines are not the only
component of an exit strategy so I
wouldn't discount drug treatment so
drugs and medications we are learning
about all the time they are also
important components of the management
of infectious diseases such as this
virus and again there are clinical
trials going on around the world
including here in the UK where thousands
of patients are already being entered
into clinical trials so that we can very
quickly determine what drugs are likely
to work and it may be likely that the
drug treatment might come before a
vaccine treatment and and that's why
it's important to learn as much as we
can through clinical trials are drug
treatments then then there are other
components of managing this virus some
of which are well main part of which of
course is the the social distancing
approach that we have at the moment all
of those saij and others will need to
give advise the government as the
science emerges as as to how they
interact and what the best course ahead
is but I think that we can emphasize
enough that we're still in round one
here we're still fighting the virus very
early on and what's absolutely critical
at the moment is that we follow the
instructions that have been given we
maintain social distancing because any
strategy will require us to get on top
of this virus and it's only by everybody
following the instructions by staying at
home over Easter and in the days to come
that we will have confidence that we
have got an underpinning to go forward
in terms of any strategy thank you
Nigel sir I'm delighted to be here today
with Martin and Martin I've been
speaking to each other I think it's
better every single day for the last
four weeks and you've asked where I've
been when I've actually been in the home
office working virtually every single
day seven days a week three days a week
in the home office actually on a range
of areas policy areas in particular that
are all related to this national
pandemic this coronavirus pandemic and
it will come as no surprise to you and
to others watching this when we think
about the daily cabinet committees and
meetings that are taking place when it
comes to whether it's the NHS the
economy public services policing when it
comes to the policies of the Home Office
in particular the support we're giving
to the NHS whether it's through the visa
changes that I've brought it over the
last three weeks or whether it's the
work of the border force where we were
absolutely prioritizing medical
equipment these are the changes that I
have been working on so I think that
this important time I'm sure viewers at
home want to know that all of their
government ministers are working night
and day to help to defeat this virus to
importantly keep the public safe you've
heard the message that we want people to
stay at home follow the rules follow the
guidance that we have been undertaken
and been pursuing but importantly making
sure that this government is working at
every single level across every
government department because this is
not just about the work of one
government department anymore that we
work together we support together to
absolutely get us through this national
pandemic was there anything else you
wanted to come back on with Nigel yes it
just backed back to - Stephen / -
Stephen Paris's point and the question
was whether it's drugs or a vaccine will
we have to carry on with some form of
restrictions until one or the other is
actually found or is ending lockdown
going to be a political and economic
decision rather than a science and
health one well well I think I going to
leave the political question aside but I
think what the job of scientists and
doctors and other
clinician sees is to provide the
government with the best possible
scientific advice as to the strategies
to manage this virus over the months to
come and probably over longer than
months because it's highly likely that
over time this virus will become
established worldwide in in population
so so this is not this was never going
to be a sprint over a few weeks this is
this is going to be a longer race it's
going to be a marathon and we do as all
countries need to do is to develop our
strategy and plot our course through
that I've given you some of the examples
of the sorts of things that we need to
consider and as I've emphasized it's
only a couple of months since his virus
emerged we are learning more and more
about the sites all the time and
therefore as that you knowledge becomes
available we will need to evolve and
modify our course to manage it over time
that that if you look back in history is
how other infectious diseases that have
come into the human population have be
managed and it will be no no different
this time
and in terms of the economic
consequences I think in the previous
answer I gave some sense of how we think
in terms of health of trying to
counterbalance the effects of economic
consequences on health but there is no
easy Court through this there is no
magical solution that doesn't require
difficult decisions and difficult
choices to be made but fundamentally as
the government has said we need to base
all these decisions on what the science
is telling us a nice Rogers concluded by
referring really what I said previously
to Ed Malik that this government is
absolutely committed to following the
advice that is being provided the
scientific advice we are in a new moon
new territory right now I see the
scientific reports every single day from
various government scientific advisors
as do all my colleagues and I think
importantly we've been very clear in
terms of the direction of travel how
we're basing our decisions they're based
upon the evidence they're based upon the
facts and of course we're learning every
single day
we'll have to make decisions in due
course but right now the message to the
country
to follow the advice that comes from
government that advice is based on the
scientific and medical advice and that
is effectively what I would urge
everyone to do thank you can I now go on
to move on to Harry Cole from The Mail
on Sunday good afternoon it's a passage
through Parliament the transition period
supposedly at the end of this year what
is the government's plan to allow
legislation and voting in Parliament to
continue while this lockdown drags on
and would you personally back the ideas
put around a virtual Parliament and
remote voting in order to get your bill
through and if I may it was reported
this morning spell checkers and as you
get better what's the message from the
Cabinet attribute when he should return
to work
well Harry let me start with your last
question first the message to the Prime
Minister is that we want him to get
better and he needs a time and space to
rest recuperate and recover that is
absolute vital and whole of cabinet
would support that message it's vital
that our Prime Minister gets well and I
think if that is the priority in the
focus right now you've mentioned the
immigration bill which was due to come
to Parliament second reading on the 21st
of April I think it's fair to say at
this stage obviously we are fully
adhering to the science the guidance the
guidelines that were all putting in
place right now when it comes to going
to work etc we do not know yet and there
are many discussions and I can't really
berate any further on those discussions
about how Parliament will resume and
function I think at this particular time
we have to focus the resources of
government all our energies ministerial
responses cabinet responses every single
sinew of government focusing on saving
lives and dealing with this awful
diseases virus coronavirus but I do
think at some stage you know we will
inevitably have to think about the work
of Parliament scrutiny and also
legislation but I think right now we are
focused on absolutely making sure we
save lives
would you like to come back at all yeah
I wonder powers had any advice for
anyone not just a PM but anyone who
suffered badly from this severe bias and
where they should pretend to work well
of course I am delighted that the Prime
Minister is now recovering
I'm not his physician he the team of
doctors and clinicians nurses of
Thomas's who are absolutely world-class
will be looking after him and and I'm
confident that they will do what all
clinicians do for every patient they
look after whether it's a another
recovering patient from coronavirus or
any other patient they will give the
appropriate advice in terms of recovery
based on the clinical course of the
condition that the individual patient
has gone through and the personal
circumstances of that individual that's
what doctors and other clinicians do day
in day out and I'm absolutely confident
that they will give the Prime Minister
the correct and the appropriate advice
thanks Harry
I'm going to now move on to Simon bins
from that Bible good afternoon everyone
this questions for the Home Secretary
and mr. Hewitt as well then we call
seven major police forces across the UK
this week to see what ask for an
understanding figures around dispersals
arrests and fines last weekend in order
to get an understanding of whether
people will this thing to government
guidance only one Greater Manchester
shared the fact that they've been
involved in over 1,100 coronavirus
related breaches that was between the
25th of March and 7th of April and it's
appreciated that you've you've shared a
number of fines handed out today does
the government or the MP CC know the
national figure for breaches for arrests
and for the average size of fine can you
share those now and also would there be
a further stronger support for the
police to help them tackle this
continuing problem if the numbers go up
rather than down in the first two weeks
of reporting and collating that dates
you mentioned previously sure sonnets
let me begin before I hand over to
Martin and I'll ask Martin actually to
talk about the data because in his
opening remarks he did speak about the
data collection that
we are now doing I think first of all
I'm absolutely clear and unequivocal in
support for the police and that means in
terms of given them the resources that
they need through this really
challenging time I've spoken previously
not just today about absolutely not just
back in them but making sure that
through the guidance that we're putting
forward they are empowered in the right
way to engage explain and encourage you
know the people members of the public
that they come across and let's not
forget we have policing by consent our
police officers our members of the
communities within which they operate
within which they please so we are
supporting them and there's a lot of
work that we're doing in terms of yes
not just empowering them and it's not
about new regulations or new guidance
the powers are there but absolutely
restating and reiterating the message to
the public which is that if we're
serious and we are absolutely committed
to and serious about saving lives then
we need the public to stay at home the
breaches or the number of breaches that
you mentioned for Greater Manchester I
think they're absolutely consistent with
the feedback that Martin and I have had
to our calls as well we've seen certain
practices garden parties and house
parties and I think Greater Manchester
police that would be the first to say
that you know they're out there breaking
them up that is completely going against
the grain and the spirit of having these
measures these guidelines and all
obviously we're asking people to take
individual personal responsibility
because even being out there in the
public domain they could absolutely help
to spread the disease and put other
lives at risk and that's what we don't
want
but Martin you want to just speak about
the data yes thank you Simon I mean I
think the first thing to say and there's
a really important point even with that
number if you think of a very densely
populated area like Greater Manchester I
really want to start by saying the vast
majority of the public are abiding by
the rules and they are acting
responsibly and that's a really
important point to make but if we think
about why these regulations were put in
the purpose of these regulations was to
reduce the transmission of this virus
and to save people's lives so whilst we
might describe them as breaches the
police will respond to those calls when
people will people let us know about
that and our objective is to get
people back to where they should be and
to avoid the transmission so it's really
important that we're responding and we
are responding across the country when
we are finding out about those but the
really important point is we're engaging
we're explaining and we're getting
people to return home and only in those
extreme cases where we have to resort to
the enforcement which would be by a fine
or if there were some other activity
there potentially an arrest now clearly
we are we obviously know how many
arrests that we are making as we always
do the fine system is a very very new
system we have now got it centrally
coordinated and as I said in my opening
remarks next week I think Wednesday we
will be producing data on exactly how
many fines that we have we have given
out as part of this process and other
data in terms of how we are policing the
lockdown period and as I said again in
my remarks we will be sharing that every
two weeks but the really really
important point is that anybody can
transmit this virus everybody needs to
be responsible and we will engage with
people to help them to be responsible
and to understand what is required so
this is not about how many fines are how
many arrests this is about getting the
majority of people which they already
are abiding by the rules so that we're
able to protect the NHS and save lives
Thank You Martin Simon was there
anything else you'd like to come back on
at all wait until next week to get those
figures I suspect you know if the data
does show an increase in breaches over
that two-week period would that lead to
stronger powers and what would those
look like it are you having those
conversations what more could you do
beyond what exists currently to to get
the message home and to make sure that
people aren't flouting the guidance
that's there already well I think first
of all I come back very much to the
theme of the questions and the answers
we've given so far this afternoon you
know the purpose of the guidance that we
put down and the regulations that went
through Parliament over three weeks ago
as Martin has servers absolutely to stop
the transmission of this virus
we're aren't people out there behaving
in an irresponsible way and
you know effectively helping to spread
the virus we will obviously and this
isn't just about breaches but we will
make our decisions as we previously made
our decisions around the regulations and
the guidance that were sent out to
police forces around the country based
on the trends the scientific evidence
that also comes forward over the next
week or so and actually we have to look
at all of this inverter tality in the
round and then we will absolutely as
with all aspects of government right now
you know keep under review look at what
is going on but actually I come back to
the main point that we have seen so far
the majority of the British public and I
thank them for the way in which they are
following the guidance the guidelines
that the government has specified and
put out and to say for the police
officers themselves they have been
working incredibly well and hard across
communities to engage explain and
encourage people not to go out there in
the public domain unnecessarily and we
will continue to do that we will
absolutely work with our policing
colleagues
police forces around the country to
continue to do that so we're going to
have to leave this briefing from Downing
Street because it's time for a news
bulletin but if you're in the UK and you
want to keep listening to this news
conference you can do so on BBC Radio 5
Live but coming up now on BBC one and on
BBC News it's the tea time
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News